meta: add guidelines for introduction of ERM support (#58526)
nodejs/node: doc/contributing/erm-guidelines.md

the disposal methods will still be called. However, when the disposal methods
are called they are not aware of the context in which they were called. These
methods will not receive any information about the exception that was thrown
or whether an exception was thrown at all. This means that it is safest to
assume that the disposal methods will be called in a context where the object
may not be in a valid state or that an exception may be pending.

## Guidelines for Disposable Objects

So with this is mind, it is necessary to outline some guidelines for disposers:

1. Disposers should be idempotent. Multiple calls to the disposal methods
   should not cause any issues or have any additional side effects.
1. Disposers should assume that it is being called in an exception context.
   Always assume there is likely a pending exception and that if the object
   has not been explicitly closed when the disposal method is called, that
   the object should be disposed as if an exception had occurred. For instance,
   if the object API exposes both a `close()` method and an `abort()` method,
   the disposal method should call `abort()` if the object is not already

>    closed.

Author: ```suggestion
   closed. If there is no difference in disposing in success or exception contexts,
   then separate disposal methods are unnecessary.
```

# Explicit Resource Management (ERM) Guidelines

Explicit Resource Management is a capability that was introduced to the JavaScript

> langauge in 2025. It provides a way of marking objects as disposable resources such

Reviewer: Small typo:
```suggestion
language in 2025. It provides a way of marking objects as disposable resources such
```

   contexts, then separate disposal methods are unnecessary.
3. Disposers may throw their own exceptions but this is not recommended.
   If a disposer throws an exception while there is another pending
   exception, then both exceptions will be wrapped in a `SupressedError`
   that masks both. This makes it difficult to understand the context
   in which the exceptions were thrown. It is, however, not possible to
   completely prevent exceptions from being thrown in the disposal methods
   so this guideline is more of a recommendation than a hard rule.
4. Disposable objects should expose explicit disposal methods in addition
   to the `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods. This allows
   user code to explicitly dispose of the object without using the `using`
   or `await using` statements. For example, a disposable object might
   expose a `close()` method that can be called to dispose of the object.
   The `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods should delegate to
   these explicit disposal methods.
5. Because it is safest to assume that the disposal method will be called
   in an exception context, it is strongly recommended to just generally avoid

>    use of `Symbol.asyncDispose` as much as possible. Asynchronous disposal can

Author: We can definitely soften this but I think the guideline is correct. Most of the time disposal should be sync as much as possible. There are likely exceptions to that rule, of course. Will think about how to soften this a bit to say it's ok to use but should be intentional?

   lead delaying the handling of exceptions and can make it difficult to
   reason about the state of the object while the disposal is in progress and
   is often an anti-pattern. Disposal in an exception context should always

>    be synchronous and immediate.

Reviewer 2: Does this rule apply to resources that are initialized asynchronously but can be synchronously disposed of?
For example, let's say, we can implement [`filehandle.close()`](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#filehandleclose) in sync (and sane) way internally. Should we prefer `Symbol.dispose` in that case? From userspace perspective, I'd expect a rule of thumb that it should be
```mjs
using handle = createDisposableResource();
// or
await using handle = await createDisposableResource();
// but usually not:
using handle = await createDisposableResource();
```

> 

Reviewer 3: This arose in a draft iteration of the mkdtemp PR, and is probably worth explicitly stating (wording up for grabs):

```suggestion
6. Asynchronous disposers, by definition, are able to yield to the event loop
   while waiting for their disposal task(s) to complete. This means that, as a
   minimum, a `Symbol.asyncDispose` method must be an `async` function, and
   must `await` at least one asynchronous disposal task. If either of these
   criteria is not met, then the disposer is actually a synchronous disposer in
   disguise, and will block the execution thread until it returns; such a
   disposer should instead be declared using `Symbol.dispose`.

```

than to inspect the return value.

Some APIs that already return object that can be made disposable do not have
this kind of issue. For example, the `setTimeout` API in Node.js returns an
object that implements the `Symbol.dispose` method. This change was made without
much fanfare because the return value of the API was already an object.

So, some APIs can be made disposable easily without any issues while others
require more thought and consideration. The following guidelines can help
when introducing ERM capabilities into existing APIs:

1. Avoid polymorphic return values: If an API already returns a value that
   can be made disposable and it makes sense to make it disposable, do so. Do
   not, however, make the return value polymorphic determined by an option
   passed into the API.
2. Introduce new API variants that are ERM capable: If an existing API
   cannot be made disposable without changing the return type or making it
   polymorphic, consider introducing a new API variant that is ERM capable.
   For example, `fs.mkdtempDisposable` could be introduced to return a
   disposable object while the existing `fs.mkdtemp` API continues to return

>    a string. Yes, it means more APIs to maintain but it avoids the complexity

Reviewer 4: Could/should we also have a deprecation strategy/guideline in this case?

For example, `the introduction of disposable variants should whenever possible be accompanied by the deprecation of their non-disposable equivalent`?

In that way this could help not increasing the APIs surface that the user needs to be aware of and we need to maintain?

Author: Hmm.. good question. I really don't know.

   and confusion of polymorphic return values.
3. If adding a new API variant is not ideal, remember that changing the
   return type of an existing API is a breaking change.

## Guidelines for using disposable objects

Because disposable objects can be disposed of at any time, it is important
to be careful when using them. Here are some guidelines for using disposable:

1. Never use `using` or `await using` with disposable objects that you
   do not own. For instance, the following code is problematic if you
   are not the owner of `someObject`:

```js
function foo(someObject) {
  using resource = someObject;
}
```

The reason this is problematic is that the `using` statement will
call the `Symbol.dispose` method on `someObject` when the block exits,
but you do not control the lifecycle of `someObject`. If `someObject`
is disposed of, it may lead to unexpected behavior in the rest of the
code that called the `foo` function.

2. Always explicitly dispose of objects in successful code paths, including
   early returns. For example:

```js
function foo() {
  using res = new MyDisposableResource();
  if (someCondition) {
    // Early return, ensure the resource is disposed of

>     res.close();

Reviewer 5: Agree with @Flana here. This recommendation beats the benefit of `using` greatly.

>     res.close();

Reviewer 6: Also disagree with this position. I think:

* In general abort-instead-of-close seems like a potentially destructive operation (e.g. disposable with pending operations) so doing it unexpectedly is dangerous.
* An exception being thrown in a `using` scope often _does not_ mean the disposable is in a bad state and can't be cleaned up: e.g. code reading a DB may well throw an exception because a result it needs couldn't be found, but that doesn't mean the DB connection resource is bad and shouldn't be tidily closed down. Assuming the disposable should be hard-shutdown by default isn't clearly correct to me even in actual exception scenarios, unless the disposable itself is internally broken somehow.
* Most disposables I can imagine would be aware of their own internal errors before disposal I would expect though (I'd be interested in counter-examples) even if they can't catch the actual exception directly, so would be able to make a clean/dirty shutdown decision themselves.
* Ecosystem discussion I have seen elsewhere all tends towards using `using` as the sole cleanup method - which seems to agree with impressions elsewhere here. We have to assume many (or even most) people who use `using` will do this.
* If people do use `using` for normal cleanup, then defaulting to 'assume exception & abort' implies things like silently dropping pending operations, or whatever the other downsides of untidy cleanup are, when users aren't expecting that. This will cause big problems.

Given that though, I'd prefer to lean towards dispose being clean by default. Imo, for any APIs where it's impossible to detect whether a clean disposal is safe and there is an important clean/dirty shutdown distinction, imo we need to either fix that or never make the API disposable at all, because otherwise we're creating a footgun.

>     res.close();

Author: Updated the language on this in the doc, please take another look!

>     res.close();

Reviewer 7: New wording is much better, thanks.

I think it might benefit from being more explicit that we're talking about errors _in the consumer_, and errors _in the object_ should be handled by having try/catch within the object's methods. So like:

> Disposers should assume that they may be called due to an exception in the consumer. (Exceptions in the object itself should be tracked by the object.) As such, if the object has not been explicitly closed when the disposal method is called, the object should be disposed as if an exception had occurred in the consumer. For instance, [...]

object that implements the `Symbol.dispose` method. This change was made without
much fanfare because the return value of the API was already an object.

So, some APIs can be made disposable easily without any issues while others
require more thought and consideration. The following guidelines can help
when introducing ERM capabilities into existing APIs:

1. Avoid polymorphic return values: If an API already returns a value that
   can be made disposable and it makes sense to make it disposable, do so. Do
   not, however, make the return value polymorphic determined by an option
   passed into the API.
2. Introduce new API variants that are ERM capable: If an existing API
   cannot be made disposable without changing the return type or making it
   polymorphic, consider introducing a new API variant that is ERM capable.
   For example, `fs.mkdtempDisposable` could be introduced to return a
   disposable object while the existing `fs.mkdtemp` API continues to return
   a string. Yes, it means more APIs to maintain but it avoids the complexity
   and confusion of polymorphic return values.
3. If adding a new API variant is not ideal, remember that changing the

>    return type of an existing API is a breaking change.

Author: ```suggestion
   return type of an existing API is a breaking change.
4. When an existing API signature does not lend itself easily to supporting making
    the return value disposable and a new API needs to be introduced, it is worth
    considering whether the existing API should be deprecated in favor of the new.
    Deprecation is never a decision to be taken lightly, however, as it can have major
    ecosystem impact.
```

> # Explicit Resource Management (ERM) Guidelines

Reviewer 8: I've not heard it used within TC39, though, and once the proposal is merged and archived, most folks will likely refer to it related to the `using` syntax, rather than the otherwise-absent phrase "explicit resource management" .

> # Explicit Resource Management (ERM) Guidelines

Author: ```suggestion
# Explicit Resource Management Guidelines
```

> # Explicit Resource Management (ERM) Guidelines

Author: Removed uses of the abbreviation.

methods will not receive any information about the exception that was thrown
or whether an exception was thrown at all. This means that it is safest to
assume that the disposal methods will be called in a context where the object
may not be in a valid state or that an exception may be pending.

## Guidelines for Disposable Objects

So with this is mind, it is necessary to outline some guidelines for disposers:

1. Disposers should be idempotent. Multiple calls to the disposal methods
   should not cause any issues or have any additional side effects.
2. Disposers should assume that it is being called in an exception context.
   Always assume there is likely a pending exception and that if the object
   has not been explicitly closed when the disposal method is called, that
   the object should be disposed as if an exception had occurred. For instance,
   if the object API exposes both a `close()` method and an `abort()` method,
   the disposal method should call `abort()` if the object is not already
   closed. If there is no difference in disposing in success or exception
   contexts, then separate disposal methods are unnecessary.

> 3. Disposers may throw their own exceptions but this is not recommended.
>    If a disposer throws an exception while there is another pending
>    exception, then both exceptions will be wrapped in a `SupressedError`
>    that masks both. This makes it difficult to understand the context
>    in which the exceptions were thrown. It is, however, not possible to
>    completely prevent exceptions from being thrown in the disposal methods
>    so this guideline is more of a recommendation than a hard rule.

Author: ```suggestion
3. It is recommended to avoid throwing errors within disposers.
   If a disposer throws an exception while there is another pending
   exception, then both exceptions will be wrapped in a `SupressedError`
   that masks both. This makes it difficult to understand the context
   in which the exceptions were thrown.
```

>    so this guideline is more of a recommendation than a hard rule.

Reviewer 9: I am not sure I fully understand this guideline. My interpretation is "do not throw unnecessary exceptions." Is there more to this that I am missing?

Author: It's also a matter of making sure that people know that pending errors get masked by throwing in the disposer.

much fanfare because the return value of the API was already an object.

So, some APIs can be made disposable easily without any issues while others
require more thought and consideration. The following guidelines can help
when introducing ERM capabilities into existing APIs:

1. Avoid polymorphic return values: If an API already returns a value that
   can be made disposable and it makes sense to make it disposable, do so. Do
   not, however, make the return value polymorphic determined by an option
   passed into the API.
2. Introduce new API variants that are ERM capable: If an existing API
   cannot be made disposable without changing the return type or making it
   polymorphic, consider introducing a new API variant that is ERM capable.
   For example, `fs.mkdtempDisposable` could be introduced to return a
   disposable object while the existing `fs.mkdtemp` API continues to return
   a string. Yes, it means more APIs to maintain but it avoids the complexity
   and confusion of polymorphic return values.
3. If adding a new API variant is not ideal, remember that changing the
   return type of an existing API is a breaking change.

> 4. When an existing API signature does not lend itself easily to supporting making
>     the return value disposable and a new API needs to be introduced, it is worth
>     considering whether the existing API should be deprecated in favor of the new.
>     Deprecation is never a decision to be taken lightly, however, as it can have major
>     ecosystem impact.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
4. When an existing API signature does not lend itself easily to supporting making
   the return value disposable and a new API needs to be introduced, it is worth
   considering whether the existing API should be deprecated in favor of the new.
   Deprecation is never a decision to be taken lightly, however, as it can have major
   ecosystem impact.
```

   has not been explicitly closed when the disposal method is called, the
   object should be disposed as if an exception had occurred. For instance,
   if the object API exposes both a `close()` method and an `abort()` method,
   the disposal method should call `abort()` if the object is not already
   closed. If there is no difference in disposing in success or exception
   contexts, then separate disposal methods are unnecessary.
3. It is recommended to avoid throwing errors within disposers.
   If a disposer throws an exception while there is another pending
   exception, then both exceptions will be wrapped in a `SupressedError`
   that masks both. This makes it difficult to understand the context
   in which the exceptions were thrown.
4. Disposable objects should expose explicit disposal methods in addition
   to the `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods. This allows
   user code to explicitly dispose of the object without using the `using`
   or `await using` statements. For example, a disposable object might
   expose a `close()` method that can be called to dispose of the object.
   The `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods should delegate to

>    these explicit disposal methods.

Reviewer 5: For a disposable that is preferred to be used with `using`, e.g. https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/58585, Should this just be a recommendation?

   disposal can lead delaying the handling of exceptions and can make it
   difficult to reason about the state of the object while the disposal is
   in progress. Disposal in an exception context is preferably synchronous
   and immediate. That said, for some types of objects async disposal is not
   avoidable.
6. Asynchronous disposers, by definition, are able to yield to other tasks
   while waiting for their disposal task(s) to complete. This means that, as a
   minimum, a `Symbol.asyncDispose` method must be an `async` function, and
   must `await` at least one asynchronous disposal task. If either of these
   criteria is not met, then the disposer is actually a synchronous disposer in
   disguise, and will block the execution thread until it returns; such a
   disposer should instead be declared using `Symbol.dispose`.
7. Avoid, as much as possible, using both `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbl.asyncDispose`
   in the same object. This can make it difficult to reason about which method
   will be called in a given context and could lead to unexpected behavior or
   subtle bugs. This is not a firm rule, however. Sometimes it may make sense
   to define both but likely not.

> ### Example Disposable Object

Reviewer 7: I think it's good to have an example of this kind of close+abort pattern, but I don't think it should be the first/only example. I would like to have the common case first and then this case introduced as something like "Example exception-sensitive disposable".

   in progress. Disposal in an exception context is preferably synchronous
   and immediate. That said, for some types of objects async disposal is not
   avoidable.
6. Asynchronous disposers, by definition, are able to yield to other tasks
   while waiting for their disposal task(s) to complete. This means that, as a
   minimum, a `Symbol.asyncDispose` method must be an `async` function, and
   must `await` at least one asynchronous disposal task. If either of these
   criteria is not met, then the disposer is actually a synchronous disposer in
   disguise, and will block the execution thread until it returns; such a
   disposer should instead be declared using `Symbol.dispose`.
7. Avoid, as much as possible, using both `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbl.asyncDispose`
   in the same object. This can make it difficult to reason about which method
   will be called in a given context and could lead to unexpected behavior or
   subtle bugs. This is not a firm rule, however. Sometimes it may make sense
   to define both but likely not.

### Example Disposable Objects

A disposable object can be quite simple:

```js
class MyResource {
  dispose() {

>     console.log('Resource disposed');

Reviewer 10: This sample doesn't fit the guideline as it might log 'Resource disposed' more then once.

>     console.log('Resource disposed');

Author: ```suggestion
class MyResource {
  #disposed = false;
  dispose() {
    if (this.#disposed) return;
    this.#disposed = true;
    console.log('Resource disposed');
```

  }

  [Symbol.dispose]() {
    this.dispose();
  }
}

{ using myDisposable = new MyResource(); }
```

> Or even fully anonymous objects:

Reviewer 5: I'd disagree with recommending returning an anonymous objects in an API design guideline. We should recommend structured API to improve comprehensiveness and discoverablity.

Reviewer 7: @legendecas The problem is that lots of APIs need a bespoke disposable which isn't used for anything else, and adding a new class for every such API ends up littering lots of little classes all over the place. See e.g. https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/58516 for such an API. I think anonymous objects are better than having a separate class for each such API.

Reviewer 5: I think the question is more like how user anticipates with a disposable API. If an API returns an object, it should be easy to know what users can do with the object. 

https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/58516 is an example that there are more properties than the documented `path` on the returned anonymous object, like `remove()`. It is not ideal to just say "the returned object has property A, B, and C". We should document every public API and its behavior clearly if possible.

Regarding "adding a new class for every such API ends up littering lots of little classes all over the place", IMO this is a question on if it is worthwhile to add a new API to add disposable support. If an API already returns an object, there is no need to add a new disposable class for it.

Author: I'm not suggesting that we would leave things undocumented. I'm saying that we don't always need formal classes in the actual implementation. For some return values we can safely rely on documentation-only and leave the actual implementation as anonymous objects. We even have existing precedence for this in the current documentation. See, for instance, all of the "Class" documentations for Web Crypto operations here: https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/webcrypto.html#algorithm-parameters ... the things like `AesDerivedKeyParams` is documented as a class but, in reality, there is no actual class named `AesDerivedKeyParams` in the source.

Author: I've expanded the document to include coverage of documentation of anonymous dispoables.

   expectation that all tasks performed by a single disposer are fully complete
   at the point that the disposer returns. This means, for example, that
   "callback-style" APIs must not be invoked within a disposer, unless they are
   promisified and awaited. Any Promise created within a disposer must be
   awaited, to ensure its resolution prior to the disposer returning.
8. Avoid, as much as possible, using both `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose`
   in the same object. This can make it difficult to reason about which method
   will be called in a given context and could lead to unexpected behavior or
   subtle bugs. This is not a firm rule, however. Sometimes it may make sense
   to define both but likely not.

### Example Disposable Objects

A disposable object can be quite simple:

```js
class MyResource {
  #disposed = false;
  dispose() {
    if (this.#disposed) return;
    this.#disposed = true;
    console.log('Resource disposed');
  }

  [Symbol.dispose]() {
    this.dispose();
  }
}

{ using myDisposable = new MyResource(); }
```

Or even fully anonymous objects:

```js
function getDisposable() {

>   return {
>     [Symbol.dispose]() {
>       console.log('Resource disposed');
>     },
>   };

Author: ```suggestion
  let disposed = false;
  return {
    dispose() {
      if (disposed) return;
      diposed = true;
      console.log('Resource disposed');
    }
    [Symbol.dispose]() {
      this.dispose();
    },
  };
```

methods directly, outside of the `using` or `await using` statements. These
can also be called multiple times and by any code that is holding a reference
to the object. That is to say, explicit resource management does not imply
ownership of the object. It is not a form of RAII (Resource Acquisition Is
Initialization) as seen in some other languages and there is no notion of
exclusive ownership of the object. A disposable object can become disposed
at any time.

The `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods are called in both
successful and exceptional exits from the scopes in which the `using` keyword
is used. This means that if an exception is thrown within the scope, the
disposal methods will still be called. However, when the disposal methods are
called they are not aware of the context. These methods will not receive any
information about the exception that was thrown or whether an exception was
thrown at all. This means that it is often safest to assume that the disposal
methods will be called in a context where the object may not be in a valid
state or that an exception may be pending.

## Guidelines for Disposable Objects

> So with this is mind, it is necessary to outline some guidelines for disposers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So with this in mind, it is necessary to outline some guidelines for disposers:
```

   closed. If there is no difference in disposing in success or exception
   contexts, then separate disposal methods are unnecessary.
3. It is recommended to avoid throwing errors within disposers.
   If a disposer throws an exception while there is another pending
   exception, then both exceptions will be wrapped in a `SupressedError`
   that masks both. This makes it difficult to understand the context
   in which the exceptions were thrown.
4. Disposable objects should expose explicit disposal methods in addition
   to the `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods. This allows
   user code to explicitly dispose of the object without using the `using`
   or `await using` statements. For example, a disposable object might
   expose a `close()` method that can be called to dispose of the object.
   The `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods should delegate to
   these explicit disposal methods.
5. Because it is safest to assume that the disposal method will be called
   in an exception context, it is generally recommended to prefer use of
   `Symbol.dispose` over `Symbol.asyncDispose` when possible. Asynchronous

>    disposal can lead delaying the handling of exceptions and can make it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   disposal can lead to delaying the handling of exceptions and can make it
```

   difficult to reason about the state of the object while the disposal is
   in progress. Disposal in an exception context is preferably synchronous
   and immediate. That said, for some types of objects async disposal is not
   avoidable.
6. Asynchronous disposers, by definition, are able to yield to other tasks
   while waiting for their disposal task(s) to complete. This means that, as a
   minimum, a `Symbol.asyncDispose` method must be an `async` function, and
   must `await` at least one asynchronous disposal task. If either of these
   criteria is not met, then the disposer is actually a synchronous disposer in
   disguise, and will block the execution thread until it returns; such a

>    disposer should instead be declared using `Symbol.dispose`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   disposer should instead be defined using `Symbol.dispose`.
```

7. Because the disposal process is strictly ordered, there is an intrinsic
   expectation that all tasks performed by a single disposer are fully complete
   at the point that the disposer returns. This means, for example, that
   "callback-style" APIs must not be invoked within a disposer, unless they are
   promisified and awaited. Any Promise created within a disposer must be
   awaited, to ensure its resolution prior to the disposer returning.
8. Avoid, as much as possible, using both `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose`
   in the same object. This can make it difficult to reason about which method
   will be called in a given context and could lead to unexpected behavior or
   subtle bugs. This is not a firm rule, however. Sometimes it may make sense

>    to define both but likely not.

Author: I'm not sure we have any actual current examples

>    to define both but likely not.

Reviewer 3: `fs.Dir` is the only one I'm aware of.

### Example Disposable Objects

A disposable object can be quite simple:

```js
class MyResource {
  #disposed = false;
  dispose() {
    if (this.#disposed) return;
    this.#disposed = true;
    console.log('Resource disposed');
  }

  [Symbol.dispose]() {
    this.dispose();
  }
}

{ using myDisposable = new MyResource(); }
```

Or even fully anonymous objects:

```js
function getDisposable() {
  let disposed = false;
  return {
    dispose() {
      if (disposed) return;

>       diposed = true;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      disposed = true;
```

      console.log('Resource disposed');

>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    },

```

into the `fs.mkdtemp` API such that a temporary directory could be created and
be automatically disposed of when the scope in which it was created exited.
However, the existing implementation of the `fs.mkdtemp` API returns a string
value that cannot be made disposable. There are also sync, callback, and
promise-based variations of the existing API that further complicate the
situation.

In the initial proposal, the `fs.mkdtemp` API was changed to return an object
that implements the `Symbol.dispose` method but only if a specific option is
provided. This would mean that the return value of the API would become
polymorphic, returning different types based on how it was called. This adds
a lot of complexity to the API and makes it difficult to reason about the
return value. It also makes it difficult to programmatically detect whether
the version of the API being used supports `using` or not.
`fs.mkdtemp('...', { disposable: true })` would act differently in older versions
of Node.js than in newer versions with no way to detect this at runtime other
than to inspect the return value.

Some APIs that already return objects that can be made disposable do not have

> this kind of issue. For example, the `setTimeout()` API in Node.js returns an

Reviewer 7: This example might get stale soon - https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/58689

Maybe [subprocess](https://nodejs.org/api/child_process.html#subprocesssymboldispose) or [readline](https://nodejs.org/api/readline.html#rlsymboldispose) instead?

   that changing the return type of an existing API is quite likely a breaking
   change.
3. When an existing API signature does not lend itself easily to supporting making
   the return value disposable and a new API needs to be introduced, it is worth
   considering whether the existing API should be deprecated in favor of the new.
   Deprecation is never a decision to be taken lightly, however, as it can have major
   ecosystem impact.

## Guidelines for using disposable objects

Because disposable objects can be disposed of at any time, it is important
to be careful when using them. Here are some guidelines for using disposable:

1. Never use `using` or `await using` with disposable objects that you
   do not own. For instance, the following code is problematic if you
   are not the owner of `someObject`:

```js
function foo(someObject) {
  using resource = someObject;
}
```

The reason this is problematic is that the `using` statement will
unconditionally call the `Symbol.dispose` method on `someObject` when the block
exits, but you do not control the lifecycle of `someObject`. If `someObject`
is disposed of, it may lead to unexpected behavior in the rest of the

> code that called the `foo` function.

Author: Does not really matter, when the markdown is rendered either way it won't be indented.

2. When there is a clear difference between disposing of an object in a success
   context vs. an exception context, always explicitly dispose of objects the
   successful code paths, including early returns. For example:

```js
class MyDisposableResource {
  close() {
    console.log('Resource closed');
  }

  abort() {
    console.log('Resource aborted');
  }

  [Symbol.dispose]() {
    // Assume the error case here...
    this.abort();
  }
}

function foo() {
  using res = new MyDisposableResource();
  if (someCondition) {
    // Early return, ensure the resource is disposed of
    res.close();
    return;
  }
  // do other stuff
  res.close();
}
```

This is because of the fact that, when the disposer is called, it has no way
of knowing if there is a pending exception or not and it is generally safest
to assume that it is being called in an exceptional state.

Many types of disposable objects make no differentiation between success and
exception cases, in which case relying entirely on `using` is just fine (and
preferred). The disposable returned by `setTimeout()` is a good example here.

> All that does is call `clearTimeout()` and it does not matter if the block

Reviewer 7: Ditto above.

Author: Switched them to `setImmediate`/`clearImmediate`

> preferred). The disposable returned by `setTimeout()` is a good example here.
> All that does is call `clearTimeout()` and it does not matter if the block

Author: ```suggestion
preferred). The disposable returned by `setImmediate()` is a good example here.
All that does is call `clearImmediate()` and it does not matter if the block
```

errored or not.

3. Remember that disposers are invoked in a stack, in the reverse order

>    in which there were created. For example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   in which they were created. For example,
```

   has not been explicitly closed when the disposal method is called, the
   object should be disposed as if an exception had occurred. For instance,
   if the object API exposes both a `close()` method and an `abort()` method,
   the disposal method should call `abort()` if the object is not already
   closed. If there is no difference in disposing in success or exception
   contexts, then separate disposal methods are unnecessary.
3. It is recommended to avoid throwing errors within disposers.
   If a disposer throws an exception while there is another pending
   exception, then both exceptions will be wrapped in a `SuppressedError`
   that masks both. This makes it difficult to understand the context
   in which the exceptions were thrown.
4. Disposable objects should expose explicit disposal methods in addition
   to the `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods. This allows
   user code to explicitly dispose of the object without using the `using`
   or `await using` statements. For example, a disposable object might
   expose a `close()` method that can be called to dispose of the object.
   The `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose` methods should then invoke

>    these explicit disposal methods in an idempotent manner.

Author: Hmm.. I'm not sure how best to change this to address your comment here. Would you mind if we push any update on this one to another edit PR?

>    these explicit disposal methods in an idempotent manner.

Reviewer 2: Sure, it's good as it is now.
I'll try to address it and make follow-up PR, editing this and the API docs.

  // be a SuppressedError if an error was thrown during disposal and
  // there was a pending exception already.
  if (error instanceof SuppressedError) {
    console.error('An error occurred during disposal masking pending error:',
                  error.error, error.suppressed);
  } else {
    console.error('An error occurred:', error);
  }
}
```

### Symbol.dispose and Symbol.asyncDispose return values

The `Symbol.dispose` method should return `undefined` and the
`Symbol.asyncDispose` method should return a `Promise` that resolves to
`undefined`.

```js
[Symbol.dispose]() {
  return void this.dispose();
  // or
  this.dispose();
  // or
  return;
  // or
  // no return
}

async [Symbol.asyncDispose]() {
  await this.dispose();
  // or
  return;
  // or
  // no return
}
```

### Debuggability of disposer methods

To improve debugging experience, The `Symbol.dispose` and `Symbol.asyncDispose`
functions should not be direct aliases of named disposer functions. They should
instead defer to the named disposer. This ensures the stack traces can be more
informative about whether a disposer was called via `using` or was called
directly.

For example:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

<!-- eslint-skip -->

```
